# Transmission Constraints on Renewable Energy in Texas
### Quantifying the Economic and Environmental Cost of Curtailed Renewable Energy

#### Annie Nguyen



## Abstract

   The upward trajectory of clean energy deployment has been a prominent
trend in recent years. With technological advancements and policy
incentives, analyses have pointed to large expected increases in wind
and solar generation capacities. This paper quantifies the economic and
environmental impact of substituting lost wind and solar energy with
fossil fuel alternatives, estimating the cost of operating fossil fuels
and calculating the associated carbon emissions. Based on the results of
the study, solar and wind curtailment in 2022 resulted in $13.7 million
spent in operating fossil fuels to substitute lost renewable energy and
is associated with 221,288 metric tons of carbon emissions. More robust
study is needed to account for the intricacies of the existing
transmission infrastructure in ERCOT and evaluate long-term economic
implications. This paper serves as a foundational step in recognizing
the implications of curtailment.

## Introduction

   With the accelerated deployment of clean energy in recent years,
increased wind and solar generation capacity has caused strain on the
grid. Although renewable energy operates at very low marginal costs and
greatly reduces carbon emissions on the environment, energy produced by
wind and solar is unable to make it to market if there is not enough
transmission available. In 2022, the U.S. government passed the
Inflation Reduction Act (IRA), a notable piece of legislation designed
to address climate concerns. With tax credits, grants, loans, domestic
manufacturing incentives, and Infrastructure Bill incentives, the IRA
promotes the expansion of renewable energy and carbon management in the
country, and models have consistently shown that IRA leads to large
increases in wind and solar deployment (Bistline, et al. 2023).

   However, continued expansion of generation capacity for renewables
would be a challenge given present transmission issues, which is often
reported by the popular press (Shenk, 2023). Transmission investments in
the past have helped increased wind penetration. In Texas, high wind
penetration numbers benefit from Competitive Renewable Energy Zone
(CREZ) initiative that brought in $6.8 billion in investments in nearly
3,600-miles of new transmission lines with approximately 18,000 MW of
capacity to accomodate wind resources in West Texas. Although wind
generation makes up the majority of renewable energy generation in
Texas, ERCOT forecasted that a range of 14.5 GW to 28.1 GW of solar
generation capacity is to be added by 2031 (Tsai & Gulen, 2017). The
completion of the CREZ lines not only increased the number of wind
penetration hours but also helped mitigate negative pricing and helped
nodal price convergence (Tsai & Gulen, 2017). In general, transmission
investments has promoted wind and solar generation capacity expansion.

   Given the current circumstances within ERCOT, transmission
constraints continues to be a problem in regards to wind and solar
curtailment. The purpose of this paper is to quantify the economic and
environmental impact of substituting lost wind and solar energy with
fossil fuel alternatives, estimating the cost of operating fossil fuels
and calculating the associated carbon emissions. Although the findings
of this paper represents only a fraction of the broader landscape, the
insights gleaned from this analysis can offer valuable initial
perspectives.
